CSCI/DASC 6040: Computational Analysis of Natural Languages
Spring 2026
Final project
For this assignment you can work in teams of two to three students. The project for this course is designed
to give you an opportunity (1) to engage with the current state of NLP research and (2) to contribute useful
knowledge to members of that community. Specifically, your team will choose one paper from the most
recent NLP conference, EMNLP 2025 (1,810 papers)[https://2025.emnlp.org/program/main_papers/], and attempt to reproduce its experiments. In some
cases, this may be a straightforward task. In some cases, it may be impossible, for a range of reasons. Your
project will do one of the following:
• Reproduce the main experiments in the chosen paper. Your report will assess the ease of reproducibility,
with respect to the checklist provided below. In addition, you should attempt at least one additional
experiment that isn’t in the paper, but that you are able to conduct after having successfully reproduced
the main results. For example, you could assess the sensitivity of the model to one or more hyper-
parameters or to the amount of training data, or measure the variance of the evaluation score due to
randomness in initial parameters.
• Report on your failed attempt to reproduce your chosen paper’s main experiments. Not all papers are
easily reproducible. Failing to reproduce the exact results of the original paper is not necessarily a
bad thing, as long as your experiments are rigorous. Your report should identify all the questions that
would need to be answered to reproduce the experiments, or discuss how the findings appear to be in
error (if that is what you discover).
Both outcomes are acceptable and can earn full credit. Some considerations in choosing a paper to
reproduce:
• You should find the problem tackled in the paper interesting.
• You should be able to access the data you will need to reproduce the paper’s experiments.
• In many cases, the authors may have made code available; this may be a blessing or a curse. You
should definitely peruse a paper’s codebase before deciding on that paper.
• You should estimate the computational requirements for reproducing the paper and take into account
the resources available to you for the project. Some authors will have had access to infrastructure that
is way out of your budget; don’t choose such a paper.
In your proposal presentation you should briefly describe:
• The paper whose experiments you plan to reproduce.
• The hypotheses in the paper you plan to versify from reproducing the experiments.
• A short description of whether and how you can access the data used in the paper.
• Whether you will use the existing code (in that case, a link to the code) or implement yourself.
In your final presentation you should create a 15 minutes presentation, following Simon Peyton Jones’s
advice on How to Give a Good Research Talk. In addition, you should emphasize if you’re able to reproduce
the results or not, along with the corresponding details (see above).
1